.TH libppl "3" "June 2012" "PPL 1.0" "libppl overview"

.SH NAME
libppl \- the C++ interface of the Parma Polyhedra Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <ppl.hh>
.sp
c++ file.cc
.B -lppl

.SH DESCRIPTION
This is a short overview on how to use the Parma Polyhedra Library (PPL)
in your C++ programs on Unix-like operating systems.
Note that the PPL has interfaces also for C, Java, OCaml and a number
of Prolog systems: look elsewhere for documentation on those.
Note also that the present document does not describe the library
functionality, its classes or its methods and functions: see
.IR "The Parma Polyhedra Library User's Manual (version 1.0)"
for this kind of information.

.SH "INCLUDING THE HEADER FILE"
The C++ interface of the PPL has only one header file, named
\fIppl.hh\fP.  So your program should contain a directive of the form
.sp
.B #include <ppl.hh>
.sp
Of course, you must make sure you installed the PPL in a place where
the compiler can find it, either by itself or with the help of a suitable
.B -Idir
command line option (see the file \fIINSTALL\fP for information
on how to configure the library so that it is installed in the
place of your choice).

.SH "INITIALIZING AND FINALIZING THE LIBRARY"
The mere inclusion of \fIppl.hh\fP in at least one file of your
project will cause the automatic initialization and finalization
of the library.
However, there are situations in which automatic initialization
and finalization is not desirable (e.g., if the application fiddles
with the GMP's memory allocation functions).  In those cases,
.B every
inclusion of \fIppl.hh\fP must take the form
.sp
.nf
.B #define PPL_NO_AUTOMATIC_INITIALIZATION
.B #include <ppl.hh>
.fi
.sp
When automatic initialization and finalization is disabled you must
.B absolutely
call the function
.sp
.B void Parma_Polyhedra_Library::initialize()
.sp
before using the library.
It is also a good norm to call the function
.sp
.B void Parma_Polyhedra_Library::finalize()
.sp
when you are done with the library.

.SH "USING THE LIBRARY"
Keeping in mind that there is no substitute for a careful reading of
.IR "The Parma Polyhedra Library User's Manual (version 1.0)",
you can find many examples of use in the directories
.B tests
(see the
.B README
file in that directory)
and
.B demos/ppl_lcdd
of the source distribution.

.SH "LINKING WITH THE LIBRARY"
Linking with the C++ interface of the Parma Polyhedra Library is best done
using the C++ compiler itself: usually, specifying the
.B -lppl
command line option is enough.  In fact, if you use a shared version
of the library, this automatically records the dependency from the GMP
library, something that the linker ought to deal with gracefully.
Otherwise you will have to add
.B -lgmpxx -lgmp
to the command line.
Things are more complex if you installed the PPL into some nonstandard
place.  In this case you will have to use the
.B -Ldir
option and, if you use a shared version of the library,
possible take further steps: see the documentation of your system
for more information on this subject
(the
.IR "Program Library HOWTO"
is especially valuable for GNU/Linux users).

.SH "IMPLEMENTING MEMORY-GUARDED COMPUTATIONS"
One of the interesting features of the Parma Polyhedra Library is the
possibility to implement memory-guarded computations.  The idea is that
you can limit the amount of virtual memory available to the process,
launch a PPL computation, and be ready to catch an
.B std::bad_alloc
exception.  Since the library is exception-safe, you can take the
appropriate corrective measures (e.g., simplify the polyhedra and/or select
less precise though less complex algorithms), and restart the computation.
In order to do that, you should define alternative memory allocation functions
for GMP that throw
.B std::bad_alloc
upon memory exhaustion.
For instance:
.sp
.nf
#include <new>
#include <cstdlib>

extern "C" void*
cxx_malloc(size_t size) {
  void* p = malloc(size);
  if (p != 0 || size == 0)
    return p;

  throw std::bad_alloc();
}

extern "C" void*
cxx_realloc(void* q, size_t, size_t new_size) {
  void* p = realloc(q, new_size);
  if (p != 0 || new_size == 0)
    return p;

  throw std::bad_alloc();
}

extern "C" void
cxx_free(void* p, size_t) {
  free(p);
}
.fi
.sp
Then you must install these functions and this can be done in two different
ways:
.IP (1)
If your C++ compiler supports
.B __attribute__ ((weak))
and you do not have any other special needs, then you can simply link
to your application a C function
.B ppl_set_GMP_memory_allocation_functions(void)
such as
.sp
.nf
extern "C" void
ppl_set_GMP_memory_allocation_functions(void) {
  mp_set_memory_functions(cxx_malloc, cxx_realloc, cxx_free);
}
.fi
.sp
This is all that you have to do, whether or not you use the automatic
initialization feature of the library (see above): in any case
the initialization procedure will automatically call
.B ppl_set_GMP_memory_allocation_functions(void).
.IP (2)
If your C++ compiler does not support
.B __attribute__ ((weak))
then you cannot use the automatic initialization feature of the library
(see above) and should write a main program of the form
.sp
.nf
int main() {
  // The ordering of the following function calls is important.
  mp_set_memory_functions(cxx_malloc, cxx_realloc, cxx_free);
  Parma_Polyhedra_Library::initialize();
  ...
.fi
.sp

.SH "USING NATIVE FLOATING POINT NUMBERS"
At initialization time, the Parma Polyhedra Library sets the FPU rounding
mode in a way that allows its floating-point-based computations to be
conservative (i.e., possibly approximated but correct) and reasonably
efficient.  In case your application itself uses native floating point
numbers and relies on a particular rounding mode (if you are in doubt,
assume that it does rely on round-to-nearest to be in effect), you should
use the function
.sp
.B void Parma_Polyhedra_Library::restore_pre_PPL_rounding()
.sp
after the PPL initialization and before using native floating point numbers
in the application.
If your application does not use any floating-point-based PPL abstraction,
no further measure should be taken.
Otherwise, it is imperative to call the function
.sp
.B void Parma_Polyhedra_Library::set_rounding_for_PPL()
.sp
before invoking any PPL interface related to such abstractions.


.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ppl-config(1)
.sp
Roberto Bagnara, Patricia M. Hill, and Enea Zaffanella.
.IR "The Parma Polyhedra Library User's Manual (version 1.0)",
available (in several formats) at
\fBhttp://bugseng.com/products/ppl/\fR .
.sp
David A. Wheeler.
.IR "Program Library HOWTO",
available (in several formats) at
\fBhttp://www.dwheeler.com/program-library/\fR .

.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of the Parma Polyhedra Library and all the documentation
is available at \fBhttp://bugseng.com/products/ppl/\fR .

.SH AUTHOR
See the file \fBCREDITS\fR in the source distribution or use the command
\fBppl\-config \-\-credits\fR for a list of contributors.

.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <ppl\-devel@cs.unipr.it>.

.SH "COPYRIGHT AND NO WARRANTY"
Copyright (C) 2001\-2010 Roberto Bagnara <bagnara@cs.unipr.it>
Copyright (C) 2010\-2013 BUGSENG srl (http://bugseng.com)
.br
This is free software; see the file \fBCOPYING\fR in the source
distribution or use the command \fBppl\-config \-\-copying\fR to
obtain the copying conditions.  There is NO warranty; not even for
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
